doc/implementation/challenges.rst, before:

.. _implementation-challenges:

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

Major implementation challenges
===============================

Network science simulation is a compute-intensive task. The expense comes from
three different sources:

- the overheads from using Python;
- the cost of running a single simulation over a possibly large network; and
- the cost of running multiple repetitios of simulations to reduce the
  variance of results.

Using Python is simply a decision to use a language that's easier to write than
(for example) C or C++, and easier to integrate with other tools, but that
inevitably runs more slowly. Essentially this decision is to prioritise
programmer time at the cost of runtime. This does make speed an issue, though,
as Python is often two orders of magnitude slower to run than the equivalent
C or C++ program (although it's often two orders of magnitude quicker to
write an debug).

Making single simulations as fast as possible involves avoiding those operations
which are inherently slower. Many network operations have computational complexities
of :math:`O(n)` or :math:`O(n^2)` when done naively: careful design can sometimes
reduce this to :math:`O(1)` or :math:`O(\langle k \rangle)`. ``epydemic`` has
a number of situations where these sorts of trade-offs occur. A good example
is the use of the :class:`Locus` to keep running track of sets of nodes or edges,
rather than extracting them from the network at each timestep (or event).

The cost of running multiple simulations reduced by using parallelism, and this is why
``epydemic`` is built on top of ``epyc``, a library for managing computational
experiments on multicore systems and workstaion clusters. ``epyc`` handles a lot
of the housekeeping needed in starting, monitoring, and collating the results of
a lot of simualtions.

Commit message:

Added a note about data structure optimisation

doc/implementation/challenges.rst, after:

.. _implementation-challenges:

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

Major implementation challenges
===============================

Network science simulation is a compute-intensive task. The expense comes from
three different sources:

- the overheads from using Python;
- the cost of running a single simulation over a possibly large network; and
- the cost of running multiple repetitios of simulations to reduce the
  variance of results.

Using Python is simply a decision to use a language that's easier to write than
(for example) C or C++, and easier to integrate with other tools, but that
inevitably runs more slowly. Essentially this decision is to prioritise
programmer time at the cost of runtime. This does make speed an issue, though,
as Python is often two orders of magnitude slower to run than the equivalent
C or C++ program (although it's often two orders of magnitude quicker to
write an debug).

Making single simulations as fast as possible involves avoiding those
operations which are inherently slower. Many network operations have
computational complexities of :math:`O(n)` or :math:`O(n^2)` when done
naively: careful design can sometimes reduce this to :math:`O(1)` or
:math:`O(\langle k \rangle)`. ``epydemic`` has a number of situations
where these sorts of trade-offs occur. A good example is the use of
the :class:`Locus` to keep running track of sets of nodes or edges,
rather than extracting them from the network at each timestep (or
event).

A more subtle situation occurs with core data structures, whose
performance (and more significantly their computational complexity) is
critical to the performance overall. Several data structures have been
re-designed when profiling has shown them to be bottlenecks.

The cost of running multiple simulations reduced by using parallelism, and this is why
``epydemic`` is built on top of ``epyc``, a library for managing computational
experiments on multicore systems and workstaion clusters. ``epyc`` handles a lot
of the housekeeping needed in starting, monitoring, and collating the results of
a lot of simalutions.
