doc/implementation/dynamics.rst, before:

.. _implementation-dynamics:

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

Simulation dynamics
===================

The :ref:`events <implementation-events>` of a simulation are only half
the story: they need to be generated and executed in the correct
order. This is the job of the dynamics classes, the sub-classes of
:class:`Dynamics`.

``epydemic`` has two simulation dynamics, for continuous-time and
discrete-time simulation. In most cases continuous time (stochastic)
dynamics is the correct choice, but we explain below in detail how
they differ.


Continuous-time (stochastic or Gillespie) dynamics
--------------------------------------------------

A :class:`StochasticDynamics` is a :term:`continuous time`
simulator. It maintains a joint probability distribution defining the
probability of a given event occurring in a given time interval into
the future. It draws from this distribution, advances the simulation
time by the chosen interval, runs any posted events that should have
occurred before this time, and then chooses an element on which to run
the event. This technique is known as :term:`Gillespie simulation`.

Let's define a variant of :class:`SIR` extended to capture the
contents of *all* its loci:

.. code-block:: python

    class MonitoredSIR(SIR):
	'''An SIR model that tracks all its compartments.'''

	def build(self, params):
	    super().build(params)
	    self.trackNodesInCompartment(SIR.SUSCEPTIBLE)
	    self.trackNodesInCompartment(SIR.REMOVED)

We can set up a single simulation of this model under stochastic
dynamics very easily:

.. code-block:: python

   # network topological parameters (for an ER network)
   N = int(1e5)
   kmean = 50

   # set up the simulation
   param = dict()
   param[ERNetwork.N] = N
   param[ERNetwork.KMEAN] = kmean
   param[SIR.P_INFECTED] = 0.001
   param[SIR.P_INFECT] = 0.0001
   param[SIR.P_REMOVE] = 0.001
   param[Monitor.DELTA] = 1

   e = StochasticDynamics(ProcessSequence([MonitoredaSIR(), Monitor()]),
			  ERNetwork())
   rc = e.set(param).run()

At each event the dynamics will choose what event should happen next,
and after how much time, based on the rates at which events can
occur. A rate is simply the probability of an event of a given type
happening (taken from the experimental parameters) multiplied by the
number of possible sites for the event to happen (taken from the size
of the locus at which the event occurs). Plotting the results we get:

.. figure:: sir-stochastic.png
   :align: center

This approach to simulation is both efficient and statistically exact,
which make it generally the default choice for simulations inn
``epydemic``. Occasionally, though, we want to run experiments
differently.


Discrete-time (synchronous) dynamics
------------------------------------

A :class:`SynchronousDynamics` is a :term:`discrete time`
simulator. At each timestep it runs all the events posted before this
time that remain to run, and then checks all the elements that *might*
have an event run on them and selects those that *do* undergo events
using the given event probability.

We can run the *same* model with the *same* parameters, and just
change the simulation dynamics:

.. code-block:: python

   e = SynchronousDynamics(ProcessSequence([MonitoredaSIR(), Monitor()]),
			   ERNetwork())
   rc = e.set(param).run()

Running this simulation will look at the important loci every unit of
time and, for each element decide whether to run an infection event
(for an SI edge) or a removal event (for an I node) depending on the
values of the experimental parameters. Plotting the results we get:

.. figure:: sir-synchronous.png
   :align: center

The stochastic case is generally faster than synchronous case -- often
massively faster. This is unsurprising: the probability of an SI edge
passing an infection (for example) is usually low in any timestep, so
most of the checks that the simulation performs will fail. By contrast
the stochastic dynamics "steps over" time when nothing is happening.
It is also statistically exact, in that the next event (and the time
until it) is chosen using all the available information relating to
all previous events, rather than all the one in the previous timestep
as happens in the synchronous case. This can sometimes lead to
different curves even for the same parameters.


Posted events
-------------

Both dynamics can have "normal" (stochastic) and "posted" events. The
former happen at a time determined by their distribution; the latter
happen at set simulation times.

Stochastic events by their nature aren't known to happen ahead of
time. Posted events can however be posted, and then at some later
point (but before the event has fired) can be determined to not be
needed any more and be un-posted to remove them from the event queue.

(To un-post an event you need its event identifier, which is returned
by :meth:`Dynamics.postEvent`. This implies that you need to remember
this information for any posted event that you might later want to
un-post. This isn't an issue in practice, as it's usually very clear
which events in a simulation might need to be un-posted, and
therefore need to have their ids recorded.)

The event queue is represented as a priority queue (or priqueue) held
in simulation time order. This is efficient for everything *except*
deleting (un-posting) events, so instead when un-posting we simply set
the event function to `None`. Accessing the queue through any of the
:ref:`posted event methods <dynamics-posted-events>` automatically
discards any leading un-posted events, so the un-posting mechanism is
transparent to client code.


Event tapping
-------------

For both dynamics, the processing is wrapped using the functions from
the :ref:`event taps interface <event-taps>`. These include marking
the start and end of the simulation, and every event fired (whether
per-event, fixed-rate, or posted).

Commit message:

Refactored choice and ordering or events under SynchronousDynamics

doc/implementation/dynamics.rst, after:

.. _implementation-dynamics:

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

Simulation dynamics
===================

The :ref:`events <implementation-events>` of a simulation are only half
the story: they need to be generated and executed in the correct
order. This is the job of the dynamics classes, the sub-classes of
:class:`Dynamics`.

``epydemic`` has two simulation dynamics, for continuous-time and
discrete-time simulation. In most cases continuous time (stochastic)
dynamics is the correct choice, but we explain below in detail how
they differ. You should also read about
:ref:`_implementation-event-interactions` to understand the details of
how different choices of dynamics can sometimes affect the results of
simulations.


Continuous-time (stochastic or Gillespie) dynamics
--------------------------------------------------

A :class:`StochasticDynamics` is a :term:`continuous time`
simulator. It maintains a joint probability distribution defining the
probability of a given event occurring in a given time interval into
the future. It draws from this distribution, advances the simulation
time by the chosen interval, runs any posted events that should have
occurred before this time, and then chooses an element on which to run
the event. This technique is known as :term:`Gillespie simulation`.

Let's define a variant of :class:`SIR` extended to capture the
contents of *all* its loci:

.. code-block:: python

    class MonitoredSIR(SIR):
	'''An SIR model that tracks all its compartments.'''

	def build(self, params):
	    super().build(params)
	    self.trackNodesInCompartment(SIR.SUSCEPTIBLE)
	    self.trackNodesInCompartment(SIR.REMOVED)

We can set up a single simulation of this model under stochastic
dynamics very easily:

.. code-block:: python

   # network topological parameters (for an ER network)
   N = int(1e5)
   kmean = 50

   # set up the simulation
   param = dict()
   param[ERNetwork.N] = N
   param[ERNetwork.KMEAN] = kmean
   param[SIR.P_INFECTED] = 0.001
   param[SIR.P_INFECT] = 0.0001
   param[SIR.P_REMOVE] = 0.001
   param[Monitor.DELTA] = 1

   e = StochasticDynamics(ProcessSequence([MonitoredaSIR(), Monitor()]),
			  ERNetwork())
   rc = e.set(param).run()

At each event the dynamics will choose what event should happen next,
and after how much time, based on the rates at which events can
occur. A rate is simply the probability of an event of a given type
happening (taken from the experimental parameters) multiplied by the
number of possible sites for the event to happen (taken from the size
of the locus at which the event occurs). Plotting the results we get:

.. figure:: sir-stochastic.png
   :align: center

This approach to simulation is both efficient and statistically exact,
which make it generally the default choice for simulations inn
``epydemic``. Occasionally, though, we want to run experiments
differently.


Discrete-time (synchronous) dynamics
------------------------------------

A :class:`SynchronousDynamics` is a :term:`discrete time`
simulator. At each timestep it runs all the events posted before this
time that remain to run, and then checks all the elements that *might*
have an event run on them and selects those that *do* undergo events
using the given event probability.

We can run the *same* model with the *same* parameters, and just
change the simulation dynamics:

.. code-block:: python

   e = SynchronousDynamics(ProcessSequence([MonitoredaSIR(), Monitor()]),
			   ERNetwork())
   rc = e.set(param).run()

Running this simulation will look at the important loci every unit of
time and, for each element decide whether to run an infection event
(for an SI edge) or a removal event (for an I node) depending on the
values of the experimental parameters. Plotting the results we get:

.. figure:: sir-synchronous.png
   :align: center

The stochastic case is generally faster than synchronous case -- often
massively faster. This is unsurprising: the probability of an SI edge
passing an infection (for example) is usually low in any timestep, so
most of the checks that the simulation performs will fail. By contrast
the stochastic dynamics "steps over" time when nothing is happening.


Posted events
-------------

Both dynamics can have "normal" (stochastic) and "posted" events. The
former happen at a time determined by their distribution; the latter
happen at set simulation times.

Stochastic events by their nature aren't known to happen ahead of
time. Posted events can however be posted, and then at some later
point (but before the event has fired) can be determined to not be
needed any more and be un-posted to remove them from the event queue.

(To un-post an event you need its event identifier, which is returned
by :meth:`Dynamics.postEvent`. This implies that you need to remember
this information for any posted event that you might later want to
un-post. This isn't an issue in practice, as it's usually very clear
which events in a simulation might need to be un-posted, and
therefore need to have their ids recorded.)

The event queue is represented as a priority queue (or priqueue) held
in simulation time order. This is efficient for everything *except*
deleting (un-posting) events, so instead when un-posting we simply set
the event function to `None`. Accessing the queue through any of the
:ref:`posted event methods <dynamics-posted-events>` automatically
discards any leading un-posted events, so the un-posting mechanism is
transparent to client code.


Event tapping
-------------

For both dynamics, the processing is wrapped using the functions from
the :ref:`event taps interface <event-taps>`. These include marking
the start and end of the simulation, and every event fired (whether
per-event, fixed-rate, or posted).
