doc/implementation/gf-maths.rst, before:

.. _gf-maths:

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

Implementing generating functions
==================================

The method of :term:`generating functions` is now ubiquitous in the
network science literature. Despite this, code to support the
creation and use of generating functions is still hard to come by, and
can be tricky to implement. In this section we'll briefly discuss the
challenges posed, and the way in whcih ``epydemic`` addresses them in
the :ref:`generating functions library <gf>`.


Generating functions in overview
--------------------------------

First, a very swift overview. A generating function is a formal power
series of the form:

.. math::

   G_0(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^\infty f(k) \, x^k

where :math:`f(k)` is a function that defines the coefficient of the
series at :math:`k` and :math:`x^k` is a formal power. (:math:`x`
should not appear free in :math:`f`.) The generating functions we're
most interested are probability generating functions, and specifically
probability generating functions of degree distributions, which take
the slightly more specialised form

.. math::

   G_0(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^\infty p_k \, x^k

where :math:`p_k` is the probability that a node chosen at random will
have degree :math:`k` (or, equivalently, the fraction of nodes in the
network with degree :math:`k`), and where the :math:`p_k` form a valid
probability distribution, all non-negative and summing to 1.

The significance of the powers of :math:`x` is that they associate the
given coefficient with a given value of :math:`k`. Evaluating the
generating function at :math:`x = 0` returns the coefficient
associated with :math:`k = 0` (since :math:`x^0 = 1` but 0 for every
other value of :math:`k`). Evaluating at :math:`x = 1` sums all the
coefficients, and so will sum to 1 for a valid probability
distribution.

As a series, generating functions can also be differentiated:

.. math::

   \frac{d}{dx} G_0(x) = G'_0(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^\infty k p_k \, x^{k - 1}

Evaluating :math:`G_0'(1)` then yields the mean degree of the network
whose degree distribution is represented by the original generating
function.

Evaluating :math:`G_0'(0)` will extract the coefficient of
:math:`k = 0`, which in this case will be :math:`1 \times
p_1`. Differentiating twice and then evaluating at 0 would give
:math:`2 \times p_k`, and so forth, meaning it's possible to extract
all the coefficients using differentiation and evaluation: the
:math:`k`'th coefficient is given by:

.. math::

   \frac{1}{k!} \, \frac{d^{(k)}}{dx} G_0(x) \bigg|_{x = 0}


Generating function definition
------------------------------

This sounds very artificial to a computer scientist: why use such a
baroque encoding?

The obvious way to define a generating function is to specify all the
coefficients manually -- and if you have those, why bother with all
the extra machinery?

However, for several degree distributions of interest the series of
the generating function is defined overall by a "special"
function. For example, consider the Poisson degree distribution of an
ER network. This is generated by a series:

.. math::

   G_0(x) = e^{\langle k \rangle (x - 1)}

and this can be manipulated using the generating function properties
and operations even though the coefficients aren't obviously stated.
Similarly the powerlaw degree distribution has the form:

.. math::

   G_0(x) = \frac{Li_\alpha(x)}{\zeta(\alpha)}

making use of the polylogarithm and Riemann zeta functions. Again, it's not at
all obvious what the coefficients of the terms are, but they can be
extracted by differentiation.


Differentiating generating functions
------------------------------------

There are three main operations we want to perform on generating
functions:

1. Evaluating them;
2. Extracting the coefficients for particular terms; and
3. Differentiating them to some (potentially high) degree.

The second operation relies on the third; the first should be
straightforward.

How do we differentiate a generating function? For maximum generality
we probably want to use numerical methods rather than symbolic. If we
have a list of coefficients then differentiation is simply an
operation performed per-element. But what about for the series
representation? Again, numerical differentiation is commonplace and
provided in a number of libraries, notably ``scipy`` which has the
``scipy.misc.derivative`` function. It turns out however that there's a
problem. Using this form of numerical differentiation works fine for a
few degrees (say up to 10) but then suffers numerical
instability. Since we might want to differentiate hundreds (or even
thousands) of times when analysing large networks, this clearly is a
limitation.

The solution, suggested in a throwaway comment by Newman
:cite:`NewmanEpidemicDisease`, is to change the differentiation
algorithm to one developed by Cauchy, involving a contour integral in
the complex plane. That is, we compute:

.. math::

  f^{(n)}(z) = \frac{n!}{2 \pi i} \oint_C \frac{f(w)}{(w - z)^{n + 1}} \, dw

Getting from here to an implementation is quite involved, but we can
implement the Cauchy procedure in Python quite easily (see
Dobson :cite:`cncp` for the details).


.. _gf-maths-constraints:

Providing a custom series
-------------------------

``epydemic`` has several common degree distribution generating
functions :ref:`built-in <standard-gfs>`, but there may sometimes be a
need to define new ones. There are some caveats if you need to do
this.

**Complex numbers.** The series are manipulated in the complex
plane. This implies that the function that defines the series must be
able to evaluate complex arguments. Not all of Python's mathematical
functions do this, but there are generally analogues available, for
example using ``cmath`` instead of ``math``. ``numpy`` is usually also
safe, as are the special functions in ``scipy``.

**Large values**. A related problem comes with numerical precision
from high-degree differentiation, where a lot of factorials are
computed that rapidly blow-out the standard numerical precision. The
solution this time is to use the factorial function from the
``mpmath`` package: not a standard package, but a dependency installed
along with ``epydemic``.

Commit message:

Added references to Wilf and Newman, Strogatz, and Watts

doc/implementation/gf-maths.rst, after:

.. _gf-maths:

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

Implementing generating functions
==================================

The method of :term:`generating functions` is now ubiquitous in the
network science literature, having been first widely introduced by
Newman, Strogatz, and Watts in 2001 :cite:`ArbitraryDegreeDistributions`.
Despite this, code to support the creation and use of generating
functions is still hard to come by and can be tricky to implement. In
this section we'll briefly discuss the challenges posed, and the way
in which ``epydemic`` addresses them in the :ref:`generating functions
library <gf>`.


Generating functions in overview
--------------------------------

First, a very swift overview. (Wilf :cite:`generatingfunctionology`
provides considerably more detail.) A generating function is a formal
power series of the form:

.. math::

   G_0(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^\infty f(k) \, x^k

where :math:`f(k)` is a function that defines the coefficient of the
series at :math:`k` and :math:`x^k` is a formal power. (:math:`x`
should not appear free in :math:`f`.) The generating functions we're
most interested are probability generating functions, and specifically
probability generating functions of degree distributions, which take
the slightly more specialised form

.. math::

   G_0(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^\infty p_k \, x^k

where :math:`p_k` is the probability that a node chosen at random will
have degree :math:`k` (or, equivalently, the fraction of nodes in the
network with degree :math:`k`), and where the :math:`p_k` form a valid
probability distribution, all non-negative and summing to 1.

The significance of the powers of :math:`x` is that they associate the
given coefficient with a given value of :math:`k`. Evaluating the
generating function at :math:`x = 0` returns the coefficient
associated with :math:`k = 0` (since :math:`x^0 = 1` but 0 for every
other value of :math:`k`). Evaluating at :math:`x = 1` sums all the
coefficients, and so will sum to 1 for a valid probability
distribution.

As a series, generating functions can also be differentiated:

.. math::

   \frac{d}{dx} G_0(x) = G'_0(x) = \sum_{k = 0}^\infty k p_k \, x^{k - 1}

Evaluating :math:`G_0'(1)` then yields the mean degree of the network
whose degree distribution is represented by the original generating
function.

Evaluating :math:`G_0'(0)` will extract the coefficient of
:math:`k = 0`, which in this case will be :math:`1 \times
p_1`. Differentiating twice and then evaluating at 0 would give
:math:`2 \times p_k`, and so forth, meaning it's possible to extract
all the coefficients using differentiation and evaluation: the
:math:`k`'th coefficient is given by:

.. math::

   \frac{1}{k!} \, \frac{d^{(k)}}{dx} G_0(x) \bigg|_{x = 0}


Generating function definition
------------------------------

This sounds very artificial to a computer scientist: why use such a
baroque encoding?

The obvious way to define a generating function is to specify all the
coefficients manually -- and if you have those, why bother with all
the extra machinery?

However, for several degree distributions of interest the series of
the generating function is defined overall by a "special"
function. For example, consider the Poisson degree distribution of an
ER network. This is generated by a series:

.. math::

   G_0(x) = e^{\langle k \rangle (x - 1)}

and this can be manipulated using the generating function properties
and operations even though the coefficients aren't obviously stated.
Similarly the powerlaw degree distribution has the form:

.. math::

   G_0(x) = \frac{Li_\alpha(x)}{\zeta(\alpha)}

making use of the polylogarithm and Riemann zeta functions. Again, it's not at
all obvious what the coefficients of the terms are, but they can be
extracted by differentiation.


Differentiating generating functions
------------------------------------

There are three main operations we want to perform on generating
functions:

1. Evaluating them;
2. Extracting the coefficients for particular terms; and
3. Differentiating them to some (potentially high) degree.

The second operation relies on the third; the first should be
straightforward.

How do we differentiate a generating function? For maximum generality
we probably want to use numerical methods rather than symbolic. If we
have a list of coefficients then differentiation is simply an
operation performed per-element. But what about for the series
representation? Again, numerical differentiation is commonplace and
provided in a number of libraries, notably ``scipy`` which has the
``scipy.misc.derivative`` function. It turns out however that there's a
problem. Using this form of numerical differentiation works fine for a
few degrees (say up to 10) but then suffers numerical
instability. Since we might want to differentiate hundreds (or even
thousands) of times when analysing large networks, this clearly is a
limitation.

The solution, suggested in a throwaway comment by Newman
:cite:`NewmanEpidemicDisease`, is to change the differentiation
algorithm to one developed by Cauchy, involving a contour integral in
the complex plane. That is, we compute:

.. math::

  f^{(n)}(z) = \frac{n!}{2 \pi i} \oint_C \frac{f(w)}{(w - z)^{n + 1}} \, dw

Getting from here to an implementation is quite involved, but we can
implement the Cauchy procedure in Python quite easily (see
Dobson :cite:`cncp` for the details).


.. _gf-maths-constraints:

Providing a custom series
-------------------------

``epydemic`` has several common degree distribution generating
functions :ref:`built-in <standard-gfs>`, but there may sometimes be a
need to define new ones. There are some caveats if you need to do
this.

**Complex numbers.** The series are manipulated in the complex
plane. This implies that the function that defines the series must be
able to evaluate complex arguments. Not all of Python's mathematical
functions do this, but there are generally analogues available, for
example using ``cmath`` instead of ``math``. ``numpy`` is usually also
safe, as are the special functions in ``scipy``.

**Large values**. A related problem comes with numerical precision
from high-degree differentiation, where a lot of factorials are
computed that rapidly blow-out the standard numerical precision. The
solution this time is to use the factorial function from the
``mpmath`` package: not a standard package, but a dependency installed
along with ``epydemic``.
