doc/bibliography.rst, before:

.. _bibliography:

Bibliography
============

.. _D20:

Simon Dobson. `Epidemic modelling: Some notes, maths, and code
<https://simondobson.org/introduction-to-epidemics/>`_.
Independent Publishing Network. ISBN 978-183853-565-0. 2020.

.. _Gil76:

Daniel Gillespie. A general method for numerically simulating the
stochastic time evolution of coupled chemical reactions. Journal of
Computational Physics **22**, pp.403-–434. 1976.

.. _Gil77:

Daniel Gillespie. Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical
reactions. Journal of Physical Chemistry **81** (25),
pp.2340-–2361. 1977.

.. _Het00:

Herbert Hethcote. `The mathematics of infectious diseases
<http://dx.doi.org//10.1137/S0036144500371907>`_. SIAM Review **42**
(4), pp.599--653. December 2000.

.. _KMcK27:

W.O. Kermack and A.G. McKendrick. `A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1927.0118>`_. Proceedings of the Royal
Society A **115** (772). 1927.

.. _KMS17:

Istvan Kiss, Joel Miller, and Peter Simon. `Mathematics of
epidemics on networks <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50806-1>`_.
Springer series on Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics
**46**. ISBN 978-3-319-50804-7. 2017.

.. _MHP10:

Sergey Melnik, Adam Hackett, Mason Porter, Peter Mucha, and James Gleeson.
`The unreasonable effectiveness of tree-based theory for networks with
clustering <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.83.036112>`_.
Physical Review E **83**. March 2011.

.. _M09:

Joel Miller. `Percolation and epidemics in random clustered networks
<https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.80.020901>`_.
Physical Review E **80**. August 2009.

.. _MGN06:

Christopher Moore, Gourab Ghosal, and M.E.J. Newman. `Exact solutions for models of evolving
networks with addition and deletion of nodes <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.74.036121>`_.
Physical Review E **74**. September 2006.

.. _New02:

M.E.J. Newman. `Spread of epidemic disease on networks
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.66.016128>`_. Physical Review E
**66**. July 2002.

.. _NZ00:

M.E.J. Newman and R.M. Ziff. `Efficient Monte Carlo algorithm and high-precision results
for percolation <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.4104>`_. Physical Review Letters **85**.
November 2000.

.. _SD13:

Saray Shai and Simon Dobson. `Coupled adaptive complex networks
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.87.042812>`_. Physical Review E **87** (4). April 2013.

Commit message:

Added reference to Molloy and Reed for the configuration model

doc/bibliography.rst, after:

.. _bibliography:

Bibliography
============

.. _D20:

Simon Dobson. `Epidemic modelling: Some notes, maths, and code
<https://simondobson.org/introduction-to-epidemics/>`_.
Independent Publishing Network. ISBN 978-183853-565-0. 2020.

.. _Gil76:

Daniel Gillespie. A general method for numerically simulating the
stochastic time evolution of coupled chemical reactions. Journal of
Computational Physics **22**, pp.403-–434. 1976.

.. _Gil77:

Daniel Gillespie. Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical
reactions. Journal of Physical Chemistry **81** (25),
pp.2340-–2361. 1977.

.. _Het00:

Herbert Hethcote. `The mathematics of infectious diseases
<http://dx.doi.org//10.1137/S0036144500371907>`_. SIAM Review **42**
(4), pp.599--653. December 2000.

.. _KMcK27:

W.O. Kermack and A.G. McKendrick. `A contribution to the mathematical
theory of epidemics
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1927.0118>`_. Proceedings of the Royal
Society A **115** (772). 1927.

.. _KMS17:

Istvan Kiss, Joel Miller, and Peter Simon. `Mathematics of
epidemics on networks <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50806-1>`_.
Springer series on Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics
**46**. ISBN 978-3-319-50804-7. 2017.

.. _M09:

Joel Miller. `Percolation and epidemics in random clustered networks
<https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.80.020901>`_.
Physical Review E **80**. August 2009.

.. _MGN06:

Christopher Moore, Gourab Ghosal, and M.E.J. Newman. `Exact solutions for models of evolving
networks with addition and deletion of nodes <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.74.036121>`_.
Physical Review E **74**. September 2006.

.. _MHP10:

Sergey Melnik, Adam Hackett, Mason Porter, Peter Mucha, and James Gleeson.
`The unreasonable effectiveness of tree-based theory for networks with
clustering <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.83.036112>`_.
Physical Review E **83**. March 2011.

.. _MR96:

Michael Molloy and Bruce Reed. `A critical point for random graphs
with a given degree sequence <https://doi.org/10.1002/rsa.3240060204>`_.
Random Structures and Algorithms" **6**(2--3). March--May 1996.

.. _New02:

M.E.J. Newman. `Spread of epidemic disease on networks
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.66.016128>`_. Physical Review E
**66**. July 2002.

.. _NZ00:

M.E.J. Newman and R.M. Ziff. `Efficient Monte Carlo algorithm and high-precision results
for percolation <https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.85.4104>`_. Physical Review Letters **85**.
November 2000.

.. _SD13:

Saray Shai and Simon Dobson. `Coupled adaptive complex networks
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.87.042812>`_. Physical Review E **87** (4). April 2013.
