.. epydemic documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Mon Jun 12 20:20:38 2017.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

epydemic: Epidemic simulations on networks in Python
====================================================

Vision: A common platform for epidemic simulation
--------------------------------------------------

``epydemic`` aims to provide a common framework for the scalable and
efficient simulation of epidemic processes.
The current version of ``epydemic`` can simulate an SIR epidemic on a
network of :math:`10^5` nodes in about 20s, using PyPy on a modern
(Intel Core i7\@3.8GHz) workstation.


What are epidemics?
-------------------

Many common processes can be treated as epidemic, where some condition
spreads between the nodes of a network. The most familiar example is a
transmissible disease such as flu, where un-infected people become
infected through contact with infceted people. Mathematically the
population of people form a network (or graph), where the nodes
represent people and the edges represent possible contacts between
them. An epidemic begins when one or more person is initially infected
and begins to spread the disease to his neighbours with some
probability. Depending on factors such as the way the network is
connected, the probability of a contact giving rise to an infection,
the rate at which people recover from the illness and so forth, the
disease may come to infect none, some, or all of the people.

It turns out that a lot of interesting processes work mathematically
like epidemics. As well as diseases, these include the spread of
computer viruses, the spread of rumours on social media (or in the
real world), the spread of genetic mutations, and even how soils
drain.

Simulating epidemic processes is therefore something a lot of people
want to do frequently. However, the actual process of setting up and
simulating an epidemic is complicated, and this is especially true
when we want to do lots of repetitions of experiments to explore how
different parameters affect the way an epidemic behaves.


What is ``epydemic``?
---------------------

``epydemic`` is a pure Python simulation framework for epidemic
processes. It aims to provide the common simulation approaches used in
the scientific literature, together with a small set of "common
epidemics" that can form the basis for experimentation. ``epydemic``
is built on top of `epyc
<https://epyc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html>`_, an experiment
management package that handles running different simulations either
on a single machine or in the cloud.


Features
--------

* Compatible with Python 3.6 and later, as well as with PyPy3

* Internal data structures optimised for performance at large scales

* Supports both discrete-time :term:`synchronous dynamics` and
  continuous-time :term:`stochastic dynamics` (Gillespie) simulation

* All details of network processes encapsulated in a single class

* Uses ``networkx`` for representing disease networks, allowing random
  networks to be generated easily and real networks to be imported
  from outside sources

* Support for a generic :term:`compartmented model of disease`,
  allowing complex and custom diseases to be described

* Susceptible-Infected-Removed (:term:`SIR`),
  Susceptible-Infected-Susceptible (:term:`SIS`),
  and Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Susceptible (:term:`SEIR`)
  models built-in, with variations

* Opinion dynamics to model the spread of rumours

* Vaccination models that reduce infection in vaccinated
  sub-populations, and allow those populations to change as the result
  of anti-vaccination rumours

* Addition-deletion process to model natural birth and death

* Includes a library for working with :term:`generating functions`, as
  used in many research papers in network science

* Integrated with ``epyc``'s labs and experiments, including execution
  in parallel on compute clusters for doing simulations at scale

* Fully compatible with ``jupyter`` notebooks and labs

* Annotated with ``typing`` type annotations


.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   install
   tutorial
   reference
   cookbook
   classes
   implementation
   glossary
   zbibliography
   contributing
