doc/networkdynamics.rst, before:

:class:`Dynamics`: Process dynamics over networks
=================================================

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

.. autoclass:: Dynamics
   :show-inheritance:


In use
------

A :class:`Dynamics` object is an instance of :class:`NetworkExperiment`
which is turn an `epyc` experiment, and
hence can be run either stand-alone or as part of a larger planned
experimental protocol. Each simulation is parameterised by a dict
providing the parameters used to condition the simulation, typically
providing event probabilities for the various events that may happen.

.. note::

   Simulations don't use :class:`Dynamics` objects directly, but
   instead use a sub-class. See :ref:`implementation-dynamics` for an
   explanation of the differences between approaches.

In stand-alone mode, a simulation is run by calling the :meth:`run`
method (inherited from `epyc.Experiment`), passing a dict of
parameters. The network dynamics then performs a single simulation
according to the following process:

* The :meth:`Dynamics.setUp` method uses :meth:`NetworkExperiment.setUp` to
  create a working network. It then lets the :class:`Process`
  configure the working copy: it calls :meth:`Process.reset` to reset
  the process, sets its working network by calling :meth:`Process.setNetwork`,
  then builds the process instance using :meth:`Process.build` and sets it
  up rerady for simulation by calling :meth:`Processd.setUp`.
* The :meth:`Dynamics.do` method is called to perform the simulation, returning
  a dict of experimental results. This method is overridden by sub-classes
  to define the style of simulation being performed.
* The :meth:`Dynamics.tearDown` method is called to clean-up the simulation
  class, using :meth:`NetworkExperiment.tearDown` to destroy the working network.

This decomposition is very flexible. At its simplest, a dynamics takes
a fixed prototype network as a parameter to its construction and copies it
for every run. More complex use cases supply an instance of
:class:`NetworkGenerator` that samples from a class of random networks defined
by the experimental parameters.

Note the division of labour. A :class:`Dynamics` object provides the scheduling
for events, which are themselves sapecified and defined in a :class:`Process`
object. There is seldom any need to interact directly with a :class:`Dynamics` object
other than through its execution interface.


Attributes
----------

.. autoattribute:: Dynamics.TIME

.. autoattribute:: Dynamics.EVENTS


Configuring the simulation
--------------------------

A :class:`Dynamics` object runs the process it describes over a
network. It also maintains the simulation time as the simulation progresses.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.process

.. automethod:: Dynamics.currentSimulationTime

.. automethod:: Dynamics.setCurrentSimulationTime


Running the experiment
----------------------

A simulation takes the form of an `epyc` experiment which has set-up,
execution, and tear-down phases.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.setUp

.. automethod:: Dynamics.tearDown

.. automethod:: Dynamics.experimentalResults


Loci
----

Loci for stochastic events are craeted by :class:`Process` instances.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.addLocus

.. automethod:: Dynamics.locus

.. automethod:: Dynamics.loci

.. automethod:: Dynamics.lociForProcess


Probabilistic events
--------------------

Stochastic events can be attached to each locus defined for the simulation.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.addEventPerElement

.. automethod:: Dynamics.addFixedRateEvent

Thes events form a probability distribution from which events can be drawn
in the course of the simulation.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.perElementEventDistribution

.. automethod:: Dynamics.perElementEventRateDistribution

.. automethod:: Dynamics.fixedRateEventDistribution

.. automethod:: Dynamics.eventRateDistribution


.. _dynamics-posted-events:

Posted events
-------------

A :class:`Dynamics` object also maintains a queue of posted event.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.postEvent

.. automethod:: Dynamics.postRepeatingEvent

This queue is then accessed to extract the events that need to be fired
up to a given simulation time.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.nextPendingEvent

.. automethod:: Dynamics.nextPendingEventTime

.. automethod:: Dynamics.nextPendingEventBefore

.. automethod:: Dynamics.pendingEventTime

.. automethod:: Dynamics.runPendingEvents

Posted events can be un-posted at any time before they
fire. (Repeating events can't be un-posted once posted.)

.. automethod:: Dynamics.unpostEvent


Event taps
----------

Whenever the network changes, there is an opportunity for the experiment
to log it or take some other action. We refer to this as the *event
tap*, as it captures the entire stream of events regardless of how
they are defined. See :ref:`event-taps` for a discussion.

To use the event tap interface, you need to override these
methods (they all have empty defaults) and ensure that they're called
from the right places.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.eventFired

There are three other methods that are called within the core of the
experiment to set up and manage the event tap.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.initialiseEventTaps

.. automethod:: Dynamics.simulationStarted

.. automethod:: Dynamics.simulationEnded

This is simply an interface definition: all the default
implementations are empty. To use the event taps you need to override
these methods for every experiment. The methods should be called as
follows:

- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.initialiseEventTaps`: Early in the
  construction process, to allow any data structures to be created.
- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationStarted`: After any set-up and
  immediately before the work of the experiment (simulation) starts,
  so that the overridden method gets to see the experiment right
  before execution.
- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.eventFired`: Immediately after each
  "event", however defined, to that the overridden method gets to see
  the effect that the method had.
- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationEnded`: After the last event
  and before any tear-down, so that the overridden method gets to see
  the final result of the simulation.

For example, in :class:`StochasticDynamics`,
:meth:`NetworkExperiment.initialiseEventTaps` is called from the
constructor of :class:`Dynamics`;
:meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationStarted` is called before the first
stochastic event is drawn;
:meth:`NetworkExperiment.eventFired` is called immediately after each
event function has been called, for both stochastic and
posted events;
and :meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationEnded` is called after the last
stochastic event has been fired.

Commit message:

Refactored stochastic event distributions from Dynamics into Process

doc/networkdynamics.rst, after:

:class:`Dynamics`: Process dynamics over networks
=================================================

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

.. autoclass:: Dynamics
   :show-inheritance:


In use
------

A :class:`Dynamics` object is an instance of :class:`NetworkExperiment`
which is turn an `epyc` experiment, and
hence can be run either stand-alone or as part of a larger planned
experimental protocol. Each simulation is parameterised by a dict
providing the parameters used to condition the simulation, typically
providing event probabilities for the various events that may happen.

.. note::

   Simulations don't use :class:`Dynamics` objects directly, but
   instead use a sub-class. See :ref:`implementation-dynamics` for an
   explanation of the differences between approaches.

In stand-alone mode, a simulation is run by calling the :meth:`run`
method (inherited from `epyc.Experiment`), passing a dict of
parameters. The network dynamics then performs a single simulation
according to the following process:

* The :meth:`Dynamics.setUp` method uses :meth:`NetworkExperiment.setUp` to
  create a working network. It then lets the :class:`Process`
  configure the working copy: it calls :meth:`Process.reset` to reset
  the process, sets its working network by calling :meth:`Process.setNetwork`,
  then builds the process instance using :meth:`Process.build` and sets it
  up ready for simulation by calling :meth:`Process.setUp`.
* The :meth:`Dynamics.do` method is called to perform the simulation, returning
  a dict of experimental results. This method is overridden by sub-classes
  to define the style of simulation being performed.
* The :meth:`Dynamics.tearDown` method is called to clean-up the simulation
  class, using :meth:`Process.tearDown` to tear-down the process anmd
  then calling :meth:`NetworkExperiment.tearDown` to destroy the working network.

This decomposition is very flexible. At its simplest, a dynamics takes
a fixed prototype network as a parameter to its construction and copies it
for every run. More complex use cases supply an instance of
:class:`NetworkGenerator` that samples from a class of random networks defined
by the experimental parameters.

Note the division of labour. A :class:`Dynamics` object provides the scheduling
for events, which are themselves specified and defined in a :class:`Process`
object. There is seldom any need to interact directly with a :class:`Dynamics` object
other than through its execution interface.


Attributes
----------

.. autoattribute:: Dynamics.TIME

.. autoattribute:: Dynamics.EVENTS


Configuring the simulation
--------------------------

A :class:`Dynamics` object runs the process it describes over a
network. It also maintains the simulation time as the simulation progresses.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.process

.. automethod:: Dynamics.currentSimulationTime

.. automethod:: Dynamics.setCurrentSimulationTime


Running the experiment
----------------------

A simulation takes the form of an `epyc` experiment which has set-up,
execution, and tear-down phases.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.setUp

.. automethod:: Dynamics.tearDown

.. automethod:: Dynamics.experimentalResults


Loci
----

Loci for stochastic events are craeted by :class:`Process` instances.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.addLocus

.. automethod:: Dynamics.locus

.. automethod:: Dynamics.loci

.. automethod:: Dynamics.lociForProcess


Stochastic event distributions
------------------------------

The stochastic events are defined and managed in the :class:`Process`
class. The dynamics only cares about their distributions.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.perElementEventDistribution

.. automethod:: Dynamics.perElementEventRateDistribution

.. automethod:: Dynamics.fixedRateEventDistribution

.. automethod:: Dynamics.eventRateDistribution


.. _dynamics-posted-events:

Posted events
-------------

A :class:`Dynamics` object also maintains a queue of posted event.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.postEvent

.. automethod:: Dynamics.postRepeatingEvent

This queue is then accessed to extract the events that need to be fired
up to a given simulation time.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.nextPendingEvent

.. automethod:: Dynamics.nextPendingEventTime

.. automethod:: Dynamics.nextPendingEventBefore

.. automethod:: Dynamics.pendingEventTime

.. automethod:: Dynamics.runPendingEvents

Posted events can be un-posted at any time before they
fire. (Repeating events can't be un-posted once posted.)

.. automethod:: Dynamics.unpostEvent


Event taps
----------

Whenever the network changes, there is an opportunity for the experiment
to log it or take some other action. We refer to this as the *event
tap*, as it captures the entire stream of events regardless of how
they are defined. See :ref:`event-taps` for a discussion.

To use the event tap interface, you need to override these
methods (they all have empty defaults) and ensure that they're called
from the right places.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.eventFired

There are three other methods that are called within the core of the
experiment to set up and manage the event tap.

.. automethod:: Dynamics.initialiseEventTaps

.. automethod:: Dynamics.simulationStarted

.. automethod:: Dynamics.simulationEnded

This is simply an interface definition: all the default
implementations are empty. To use the event taps you need to override
these methods for every experiment. The methods should be called as
follows:

- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.initialiseEventTaps`: Early in the
  construction process, to allow any data structures to be created.
- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationStarted`: After any set-up and
  immediately before the work of the experiment (simulation) starts,
  so that the overridden method gets to see the experiment right
  before execution.
- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.eventFired`: Immediately after each
  "event", however defined, to that the overridden method gets to see
  the effect that the method had.
- :meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationEnded`: After the last event
  and before any tear-down, so that the overridden method gets to see
  the final result of the simulation.

For example, in :class:`StochasticDynamics`,
:meth:`NetworkExperiment.initialiseEventTaps` is called from the
constructor of :class:`Dynamics`;
:meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationStarted` is called before the first
stochastic event is drawn;
:meth:`NetworkExperiment.eventFired` is called immediately after each
event function has been called, for both stochastic and
posted events;
and :meth:`NetworkExperiment.simulationEnded` is called after the last
stochastic event has been fired.
