Bond and site percolation
=========================

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

The family of :term:`percolation` processes are common in physics as a
way to study the gradual accretion of nodes (site percolation) or
edges (bond percolation) in a network. The process itself is easy to
describe.

**Bond percolation**: The network has all its edges labelled as
"unoccupied". For a given probability :math:`\phi` each edge is marked
as occupied. At the end of this process the occupied edges will
determine a sub-graph of the original network, consisting of one or
more connected components.

**Site percolation**: The network's nodes are marked an unoccupied,
and each is then occupied with probability :math:`\phi`. At the end of
the process the edges between occupied nodes are marked as occupied,
and again define a sub-graph.

.. note::

    To perform bond (edge) percolation in conjuction with epidemic
    processes see :class:`Percolate`.

The reason percolation is of interest is that it provides a model of a
wide range of interesting processes. (Originally it was used to study
crack formation in crystals and waterflow in soils.) It also bears a
striking similarity to the ways in which epidemics form, with the
final occupied sub-graph being mathematically related to the contact
tree of an epidemic. This lets us study epidemics using percolation,
an approach pioneered by Newman :cite:`NewmanEpidemicDisease`.


The Newman-Ziff algorithm
-------------------------

While percolation can also be used in conjunction with epidemic
processes, it is often used standalone to study the size of the
:term:`giant connected component` (GCC) formed by the occupied
sub-graph. An algorithm due to Newman and Ziff :cite:`NewmanZiff` can
generate instances of percolated sub-graphs for *every* value of
:math:`\phi` in a single sweep through the network. The algorithm is
very fast, performing (for example) a site percolation experiment on a
million-node network in under 30s.

Newman-Ziff has variants for both bond (occupying edges) and site
(occupying nodes) percolation. Both derive from the same base class,
which isn't used directly.

.. autoclass:: NewmanZiff
   :show-inheritance:

Two methods control the lifecycle of the percolation experiment.

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.setUp

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.tearDown

Two other methods control sampling and reporting.

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.sample

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.report

There are several methods that can be used to query the progress of a
percolation process or to create new percolation process variants.

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.components

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.componentSize

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.largestComponentSize

.. automethod:: NewmanZiff.inLargestComponent


Results
-------

Percolation is a very detailed process, occupying edges or nodes one
at a time. This makes it both time-consuming and data-rich: *too*
data-rich in the main. For this reason the constructors take either a
number or a sequence of sample points at which to return data about
the progress of the process.

Both bond and site percolation processes result in two time series:
one consisting of the percolation probabilities at which the process
was sampled; and the other holding the sizes of the largest connected
component at these probabilities.

.. warning::

   Versions of ``epydemic`` prior to 1.9.1 laid out the results of
   percolation processes slightly differently.


Bond percolation
----------------

.. autoclass:: BondPercolation
   :show-inheritance:

.. automethod:: BondPercolation.setUp

.. automethod:: BondPercolation.do

The percolation process returns two time series:

.. autoattribute:: BondPercolation.P

.. autoattribute:: BondPercolation.GCC

The process has one event:

.. autoattribute:: BondPercolation.OCCUPY

.. automethod:: BondPercolation.occupy

.. note::

   See the cookbook recipe :ref:`percolation-threshold` for an example
   of using this class.

Site percolation
----------------

.. autoclass:: SitePercolation
   :show-inheritance:

.. autoattribute:: SitePercolation.OCCUPY

.. automethod:: SitePercolation.setUp

.. automethod:: SitePercolation.do

The percolation process returns two time series:

.. autoattribute:: SitePercolation.P

.. autoattribute:: SitePercolation.GCC

The process has one events:

.. autoattribute:: SitePercolation.OCCUPY

.. automethod:: SitePercolation.occupy
