doc/percolate.rst, before:

:class:`Percolate`: Perform bond percolation
============================================

.. currentmodule :: epydemic

.. autoclass :: Percolate


Using percolation
-----------------

One can use percolation as an end in itself: percolation is often used as a substitute
for spidemic simulation, following the well-known similarity between the contact network
arising from epidemic infection and the edges occupied by bond percolation.

A different usage comes when percolating a network prior to (or possibly after) some other
process being run. This takes a base network and runs a percolation process on it first, before
running another process on the remaining ("residual") network. The cleanest way to
structure this sort of code is to define the second process independently and then
define another class that inherits from both :class:`Percolate` and this new process.
When run, Python's multiple inheritance will run the :meth:`Process.build` methods
in order, percolating the base network before building the second process' structures.


Percolation
-----------

The probability that an edge is retained is given by an experimental parameter.

.. autoattribute :: Percolate.T

Given this, the percolation process itself simply registers edges as either
occupied or unoccupied, return the latter set.

.. automethod :: Percolate.percolate


Actions
-------

The main action of percolation concerns what to do with the unoccupied
edges .

.. automethod :: Percolate.unoccupy

This is called as part of the construction process.

.. automethod :: Percolate.build

Commit message:

Refactored Percolate to support better specialisation

doc/percolate.rst, after:

:class:`Percolate`: Perform bond percolation
============================================

.. currentmodule :: epydemic

.. autoclass :: Percolate


Using percolation
-----------------

One can use percolation as an end in itself: percolation is often used as a substitute
for spidemic simulation, following the well-known similarity between the contact network
arising from epidemic infection and the edges occupied by bond percolation.

A different usage comes when percolating a network prior to (or possibly after) some other
process being run. This takes a base network and runs a percolation process on it first, before
running another process on the remaining ("residual") network. The cleanest way to
structure this sort of code is to define the second process independently and then
define another class that inherits from both :class:`Percolate` and this new process.
When run, Python's multiple inheritance will run the :meth:`Process.build` methods
in order, percolating the base network before building the second process' structures.


Percolation
-----------

The probability that an edge is retained is given by an experimental parameter.

.. autoattribute :: Percolate.T

Given this, the percolation process itself simply registers edges as either
occupied or unoccupied. It then executes an action for each of these sets.

.. automethod :: Percolate.percolate


Actions
-------

The actions of percolation concern what to do with the occupied and unoccupied
edges.

.. automethod :: Percolate.occupy

.. automethod :: Percolate.unoccupy

Building
--------

.. automethod :: Percolate.build
