doc/process.rst, before:

:class:`Process`: Base class for network processes
==================================================

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

.. autoclass:: Process
   :show-inheritance:


Setup and initialisation
------------------------

Five methods provide the core API for defining new processes, and are typically overridden by sub-classes.

.. automethod:: Process.reset

.. automethod:: Process.build

.. automethod:: Process.setUp

.. automethod:: Process.tearDown

.. automethod:: Process.atEquilibrium

.. automethod:: Process.results


Getting ready to run
--------------------

Several other methods provide information for the process.

.. automethod:: Process.setNetwork

.. automethod:: Process.network

.. automethod:: Process.setDynamics

.. automethod:: Process.dynamics

.. automethod:: Process.setMaximumTime

.. automethod:: Process.maximumTime


Accessing and evolving the network
----------------------------------

A process will generally want to access the working network in the course of its execution,
mainly in event functions. Accessing the network can be done directly, through :meth:`network`:
however, processes often need to track changes made to the network, and for this reason the
class provides an interface for evolving the network, paralleling the methods available
in `networkx`.

The interface may be overridden and extended by sub-classes. Three methods form the general core.

.. automethod:: Process.addNode

.. automethod:: Process.removeNode

.. automethod:: Process.addEdge

.. automethod:: Process.removeEdge

Four other "bulk" methods are deinfed in terms of the basic methods, and so don't typically
need to be overridden specifically.

.. automethod:: Process.addNodesFrom

.. automethod:: Process.removeNodesFrom

.. automethod:: Process.addEdgesFrom

.. automethod:: Process.removeEdgesFrom


Loci
----

Loci are the "locations" at which things happen. The purpose of a :class:`Locus` is to keep
track of something -- a set of nodes, the entire network, and so forth -- so that
simulation can proceed efficiently.

.. automethod:: Process.addLocus

.. automethod:: Process.loci

.. automethod:: Process.locus


Events
------

Events are the code fragments that run as part of the simulation. The
collection of events defined by a process form all the possible
actions that the simulation will perform. Events can be given
meaningful names, which don't affect the execution of the simulation.

There are three broad classes of events. *Per-element* events occur with a probability
on each element of a locis. This means that loci with more elements will generate a higher
rate of events.

.. automethod:: Process.addEventPerElement

*Fixed-rate* events, by contrast, occur with a probability that's independent of the
number of elements in a locus, as long as it's not empty. This means that the rate at
which such events fire is independent of the size of the locus.

.. automethod:: Process.addFixedRateEvent

These two kinds of events are both *stochastic*, in the sense that they are generated according
to an exponential probability distribution.

In contrast, *posted* events are set to occur at a particular simulation time. As the
simulation proceeds it will execute posted events in the correct time sequence relative
to the different stochastic events that are generated.

.. automethod:: Process.postEvent

.. automethod:: Process.postRepeatingEvent


Identifiers for instances, runs, and state
------------------------------------------

Every process instance has an identifier that's guaranteed to be
unique within this simulation, and a run identifier that's
guaranteed to be unique to different runs of the same process
instance. Taken together, these two identifiers uniquely identify
a single run of a single process instance.

.. automethod:: Process.instanceId

.. automethod:: Process.runId

There is also a method for defining "constants" to be used as
attributes on nodes and edges for storing process state.

.. automethod:: Process.stateVariable

(See :ref:`subclassing` for an example of how to define state variables.)


Containment
-----------

Processes can have a hierarchy, for example when composed into a
:class:`ProcessSequence`. There are a couple of methods used to access
this hierarchy.

.. automethod:: Process.setContainer

.. automethod:: Process.container

Commit message:

Added unpostEvent helper method, linked helpers to Dynamics methods

doc/process.rst, after:

:class:`Process`: Base class for network processes
==================================================

.. currentmodule:: epydemic

.. autoclass:: Process
   :show-inheritance:


Setup and initialisation
------------------------

Five methods provide the core API for defining new processes, and are typically overridden by sub-classes.

.. automethod:: Process.reset

.. automethod:: Process.build

.. automethod:: Process.setUp

.. automethod:: Process.tearDown

.. automethod:: Process.atEquilibrium

.. automethod:: Process.results


Getting ready to run
--------------------

Several other methods provide information for the process.

.. automethod:: Process.setNetwork

.. automethod:: Process.network

.. automethod:: Process.setDynamics

.. automethod:: Process.dynamics

.. automethod:: Process.setMaximumTime

.. automethod:: Process.maximumTime


Accessing and evolving the network
----------------------------------

A process will generally want to access the working network in the course of its execution,
mainly in event functions. Accessing the network can be done directly, through :meth:`network`:
however, processes often need to track changes made to the network, and for this reason the
class provides an interface for evolving the network, paralleling the methods available
in `networkx`.

The interface may be overridden and extended by sub-classes. Three methods form the general core.

.. automethod:: Process.addNode

.. automethod:: Process.removeNode

.. automethod:: Process.addEdge

.. automethod:: Process.removeEdge

Four other "bulk" methods are deinfed in terms of the basic methods, and so don't typically
need to be overridden specifically.

.. automethod:: Process.addNodesFrom

.. automethod:: Process.removeNodesFrom

.. automethod:: Process.addEdgesFrom

.. automethod:: Process.removeEdgesFrom


Loci
----

Loci are the "locations" at which things happen. The purpose of a :class:`Locus` is to keep
track of something -- a set of nodes, the entire network, and so forth -- so that
simulation can proceed efficiently.

.. automethod:: Process.addLocus

.. automethod:: Process.loci

.. automethod:: Process.locus


Events
------

Events are the code fragments that run as part of the simulation. The
collection of events defined by a process form all the possible
actions that the simulation will perform. Events can be given
meaningful names, which don't affect the execution of the simulation
All these methods are simply helpers for the corresponding methods in
:class:`Dynamics`.

There are three broad classes of events. *Per-element* events occur with a probability
on each element of a locis. This means that loci with more elements will generate a higher
rate of events.

.. automethod:: Process.addEventPerElement

*Fixed-rate* events, by contrast, occur with a probability that's independent of the
number of elements in a locus, as long as it's not empty. This means that the rate at
which such events fire is independent of the size of the locus.

.. automethod:: Process.addFixedRateEvent

These two kinds of events are both *stochastic*, in the sense that they are generated according
to an exponential probability distribution.

In contrast, *posted* events are set to occur at a particular simulation time. As the
simulation proceeds it will execute posted events in the correct time sequence relative
to the different stochastic events that are generated.

.. automethod:: Process.postEvent

.. automethod:: Process.unpostEvent

.. automethod:: Process.postRepeatingEvent



Identifiers for instances, runs, and state
------------------------------------------

Every process instance has an identifier that's guaranteed to be
unique within this simulation, and a run identifier that's
guaranteed to be unique to different runs of the same process
instance. Taken together, these two identifiers uniquely identify
a single run of a single process instance.

.. automethod:: Process.instanceId

.. automethod:: Process.runId

There is also a method for defining "constants" to be used as
attributes on nodes and edges for storing process state.

.. automethod:: Process.stateVariable

(See :ref:`subclassing` for an example of how to define state variables.)


Containment
-----------

Processes can have a hierarchy, for example when composed into a
:class:`ProcessSequence`. There are a couple of methods used to access
this hierarchy.

.. automethod:: Process.setContainer

.. automethod:: Process.container
